##Step By Step Into BIOS

```  
[f000:fff0]    0xffff0:	ljmp   $0xf000,$0xe05b
```  
current _cs_ is 0xf000 and _ip_ 0xfff0, which is 0xffff0 just 16 bytes from top (0xfffff)  
I'm not sure why it starts with 16 bytes from top, could be the jump instruction. As described in _Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual: Volume 2_  
>[Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual: Volume 2](http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/64-ia-32-architectures-software-developer-instruction-set-reference-manual-325383.html)


###prerequisite work
```  
0xfe05b:   cmpl   $0x0,%cs:0x65b4  
0xfe062:   jne    0xfd3aa  
```  
not sure why jumps to 0xfd3aa. May need to look back later.


```  
0xfe066:   xor    %ax,%ax  
```  
clear _ax_


```  
0xfe068:   mov    %ax,%ss  
```  
clear _ss_. we are in real mode, so stack base is pointed by _ss:bp_ and top by _ss:sp_. In protected mode, however, stack base is _bp_ and offset is _sp_, so top is pointed by _bp:sp_


```  
0xfe06a:    mov    $0x7000,%esp  
```  
points _sp_ (stack top) to 0x7000 inside "low memory" (0x0 ~ 0xA0000)  
there is nothing there  
```  
(gdb) x/16x 0x7000  
0x7000:	    0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000  
0x7010:	    0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000  
0x7020:	    0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000  
0x7030:	    0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000	0x00000000 
```


```  
0xfe070:	    mov    $0xf431f,%edx  
(gdb) x/16x 0xf431f  
0xf431f:    0x2cec8353	0x042444c7	0x000f6114	0x0f2404c7 
0xf432f:    0xe8000f5f	0xffffe0bd	0x000000bb	0x24448d40 
0xf433f:    0x24448918	0x24448d04	0x24048914	0x10244c8d 
0xf434f:    0x0c24548d	0x60e8d889	0x8bffffd6	0x89102444 
```  
not sure why. May need to look later.  
update: %edx sees to be where bios functionalities to be lying.  


###jump to "real meat"

```  
0xfe076:	    jmp    0xfd233
```  
jump to the real meat


```  
0xfd233:	    mov    %eax,%ecx  
```  
clear _cx_


```  
0xfd236:	cli  
```  
stop interrupt


```  
0xfd237:	cld  
```  
clear data flag


```  
0xfd238:   mov    $0x8f,%eax  
0xfd23e:   out    %al,$0x70  
```  
output 0x8f to port 0x70.


The instruction is 8-bit wide.  
The highest order bit is to enable/disable NMI (Non-Maskable Interrupts). NMI is for hardware failure and the other is for "watchdog" timer to detect kernel lockup. Source can be found [here](http://wiki.osdev.org/NMI).  
In this case, NMI is turned on (1000 1111). The remaining 7 bits are to address CMOS.


###select CMOS "register"  
port 0x70 is to select CMOS "registers" (legacy name). The general format is
```  
_outb (0x70, (NMI_disable_bit << 7) | (selected CMOS register number))_
```  


This code selects register 0xf (1111). 0xf stores shutdown status. see [here](http://www.bioscentral.com/misc/cmosmap.htm) or [here](http://www.walshcomptech.com/ohlandl/config/cmos_registers.html)


###read/write CMOS "register"  
```  
0xfd240:     in     $0x71,%al
```  
after selection, we can read/write through port 0x71 one byte a time. This code reads CMOS "register" 0xf to _al_


```  
(gdb) info registers  
eax            0x0	0
```  
value 0 means "power on or soft reboot".


###test A20
```  
0xfd242:    in     $0x92,%al  
0xfd244:    or     $0x2,%al  
0xfd246:    out    %al,$0x92
```  
enables A20 line (fast A20 gate)


###what is A20?  
A20 is a long story. Interested readers can find more fun (pain) [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A20_line) and [here](https://www.win.tue.nl/~aeb/linux/kbd/A20.html).    

A20 is one of the most notorious hack in computer history. Originally, Intel's 8088 had only 1MB address space, so address space ranges from 0 to 1MB-1. If an address exceeds 1MB-1, for example, 1MB, it wraps around to 0.  

Dos programmers figured out a way to avoid loading segment register (too slow at that time) by exploiting this feature(design flaw). For example, one data segment is at 0xf800:0x0000, and the other is at 0x0000:0x8000. Instead of loading 0xf800 and 0x0000 when switching from one segment to the other, the second segment can be pointed at 0xf800:0x8000, which wraps around to 0x0. This is okay because there is no physical memory at 1MB any way.  

Then IBM came up with 80286, which supports up to 16MB RAM with real and protected modes. The purpose of real mode is to be compatiable with older programs. But Intel made a mistake (A BUG!!!), programs in real mode can acutally access address at 1MB (1 extra byte!!). As a result, those hacky programs (trying to avoid loading segment registers by wrapping from 1MB to 0) could no longer work.  

IBM decided to fix(hack) this on motherboard. So they used the unused pin from keyboard controller to be the status bit (enable/disable A20 line) and named it Gate-A20. Intially, the port was 0x64, but it was too slow. So lots of ports tried and finally settled on port 0x92 - the PS/2 port (that's what we see in the program). Using 0x92 is also called Fast A20 Gate.  

Enabling A20 also allows to access more than 1MB memory.


###switch to 'protected mode'

```  
0xfd248:	lidtw  %cs:0x68f8    
0xfd24e:	lgdtw  %cs:0x68b4  
0xfd254:	mov    %cr0,%eax  
0xfd257: 	or     $0x1,%eax  
0xfd25b: 	mov    %eax,%cr0  
0xfd25e:	ljmpl  $0x8,$0xfd266
```
these lines of code together switch cpu to protected mode. I'll explain line by line


```  
0xfd248:	lidtw  %cs:0x68f8
```
loads interrupt descriptor table

```  
0xfd24e:	lgdtw  %cs:0x68b4  
```
loads global descriptor table

```  
0xfd254:	mov    %cr0,%eax  
```
first bit of cr0 indicates which mode cpu is currently in. This saves result into _ax_  


```  
0xfd257: 	or     $0x1,%eax  
```
enable protected mode. use _or_ to make sure first bit is always turned on. also preserves other bits in cr0.    


```  
0xfd25b: 	mov    %eax,%cr0    
```  
refreshes cr0. protected mode enabled.


```  
0xfd25e:	ljmpl  $0x8,$0xfd266  
```  
ljmp vs ljmpl: ljmpl switches operand width (16 to 32; 32 to 16). here it switches to 32 bit from 16    
jmp vs ljmp: ljmp jumps within 16-bit range = 2^16 = 64KB. Also ljmp changes _cs_, which is necessary to load correct address of code segment used by GDT when switching to protected mode.  
Paging is not enabled, so we still uses memory segmentation. The base address (and other information, like privilages and segment size) are stored inside a memory segment descriptor, which is stored in GDT. _cs_ should index a descriptor in GDT. The indexing information in _cs_ is called a descriptor.  

There are some confusing names involved. Please take extra notice.
>selector  
>descriptor  
>GDT  


>segmentation  
>paging  


>real mode  
>protected mode  


>_cr0_  
>_cs_  


>_ljmpl_


For the overall process of switching from real to protected mode.  
Refer to [this SO thread](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/5211541/bootloader-switching-processor-to-protected-mode)  


**For structure of selector**  
Refer to [this](http://wiki.osdev.org/Selector)  


**For structure of descriptor**  
Refer to [this](http://wiki.osdev.org/Descriptor). Notice there are three types of descriptors here, all using similar structure. We are only talking about Memory Segment Descriptor here.  


**For structure of GDT**  
Refer to [this](http://wiki.osdev.org/GDT)  


before ljmp  
```  
(gdb) info registers cs  
cs             0xf000  
```  


after ljmp  
```  
(gdb) info registers cs  
cs             0x8  
```  
notice _0x8_ is the value ljmpl specified. But I'm not sure why it's 0x08 (number 1 descriptor). Needs to look back later.(Note: the descriptor is 8-byte, see [ex3 - GDT](https://github.com/Philip-Li/6.828-MIT/blob/master/hw1/1_ex3.md))    
We can see indeed ljmp has changed _cs_. Now _cs_ is holding a selector pointing to a descriptor in GDT, in order to address the memory (with protection).  


```  
The target architecture is assumed to be i386  
```  
We are now in protected mode!!  


###initializing segment selectors
```  
0xfd266:   mov    $0x10,%eax  
0xfd26b:   mov    %eax,%ds  
0xfd26d:   mov    %eax,%es  
0xfd26f:   mov    %eax,%ss  
0xfd271:   mov    %eax,%fs  
0xfd273:   mov    %eax,%gs  
```  
not sure why these selectors are set to 0x10(number 2 descriptor). May need to look later.(Note: This is the third segment descriptor, so 16 bytes before it. see [ex3 - GDT](https://github.com/Philip-Li/6.828-MIT/blob/master/hw1/1_ex3.md))  


### bios starts to do its work
```  
0xfd275:  mov    %ecx,%eax  
0xfd277:  jmp    *%edx  
0xf431f:  push   %ebx  
0xf4320:  sub    $0x2c,%esp  
0xf4323:  movl   $0xf6114,0x4(%esp)  
0xf432b:  movl   $0xf5f0f,(%esp)  
0xf4332:  call   0xf23f4  
```  
not sure what bios is doing from now on. seems to be calling its routines and do its work. This could be better explained with source code.  